Proyecto RECLAM

Plan Complementario de Ciencias Marinas y del Plan de Recuperación, Transformación y Resiliencia.

Fish and shellfish stocks are declining worldwide and there are several examples of our failure to prevent fisheries collapses and a subsequent incapacity to promote their recuperation. The effective integration of data and theory from different sources and disciplines should allow disentangling the key factors involved in a fishery collapse and recover. This proposal integrates data and theory from evolutionary biology, seascape genomics and biomonitoring with the effects of environmental variability and degradation, stock assessments along with past and present management practises to understand such factors using the striped venus (*Chamelea gallina*) and the wedge (*Donax trunculus*) clam fisheries as model systems. Fish and shellfish stocks are declining worldwide and there are several examples of our failure to prevent fisheries collapses and a subsequent incapacity to promote their recuperation. The effective integration of data and theory from different sources and disciplines should allow disentangling the key factors involved in a fishery collapse and recover. This proposal integrates data and theory from evolutionary biology, seascape genomics and biomonitoring with the effects of environmental variability and degradation, stock assessments along with past and present management practises to understand such factors using the striped venus (*Chamelea gallina*) and the wedge (*Donax trunculus*) clam fisheries as model systems. Fish and shellfish stocks are declining worldwide and there are several examples of our failure to prevent fisheries collapses and a subsequent incapacity to promote their recuperation. The effective integration of data and theory from different sources and disciplines should allow disentangling the key factors involved in a fishery collapse and recover. This proposal integrates data and theory from evolutionary biology, seascape genomics and biomonitoring with the effects of environmental variability and degradation, stock assessments along with past and present management practises to understand such factors using the striped venus (*Chamelea gallina*) and the wedge (*Donax trunculus*) clam fisheries as model systems. 
Current evidence suggests that the stocks of these species are either fully fished or have already commercially collapsed. The general objective is to develop and implement observation and monitoring tools to inform decision-making and delineate efficient measures.



